64 MATmCULA'rmN LA'rm.

probably due to metrical convenience) may serve to distinguish
them. For the sequence after the hist. pres. demittit see 524. i.
magnum ; ‘ vast or deep.’ aera : for the Greek accus. ending see
on l. 30.

301. remigio alarum : Mercury's winged cap and winged sandals
are compared to a ship’s oars. citus: trans. freely by adverb
(705. d).

303. volente deo : freely, ‘ at the divine command.' Our abbre-
viation 1).V. is for cleo volente, but in the sense of ‘if (not since)
God wills' (305). quietum: negative, ‘free from alarm,' while
bem'ynoem, 1. 304, is positive, ‘ well-disposed or friendly.'

304. accipit: ‘adopts'3 lit. ‘receives' as if from Mercury.
animum mentemque : no distinction can be drawn here.

305-334. Aeneas, settim] out to explere the country, i3 met by
Venus in, the disyuise os a huntress, of whom he ask-s on what coast

they hare been cast.

305. volvens : ‘ who had been pondering.'

306. ut primum: ‘as soon as’3 ut z when (646 b). exire: with
constitnit, l. 309.

307. novos: ‘strange' accesserit: for mood see 5333 so teneant.
For the accus. oras see 568. ii.

308. nam . . . videt: parenthetica1; ‘for he sees buta wilder-
ness.' For the scansion see page 19, 4. ne . . . ne: rare for
‘whether . . . or' (536. ii)

309. quaerere: really unnecessary, as the clauses quaa . .’ .
feraene might have gone with (implorare, but added for clearness'
sake. exacta: ‘ his diseoveries,' lit. ‘ the things ascertained.'

310. in convexo nemorum : “ Here the picture is that of trees
upon converging eliffs, overhanging a eove formed under them by
the action of the waves.” Freely, ‘in a cove overarched with
woods’

311. circum: adverb. horrentibus: for the meaning ef. on
l. 165.

