No'rEs ox VIRGIL, AENEID 1. 73

447. opulentum: a case of zeuyma (cf. on l. 356).

448. aerea: notice the emphatic repetition of this idea in aere ·
and aenis; ‘bronze was the threshold that rose 011 (or crowned) its
steps, and clamped with bronze the posts.' cui: lit. ‘with
reference to which’3 freely, ‘its’ (579); cf. tibi, l. 334. limina:
the plur. probably as in l. 427. nexaeque : for the scansion cf. on
1. 332.

449. trabes: subject of sumebant or erant understood. fori-
bus, etc. : ⁴ of bronze were the doors with their grating hinges' ;
lit. ‘ the hinge grated on doors of bronze.' foribus: local ahl. or
possibly dat. (lit. ‘for').

450. timorem : as to his reception by Dido. Venus had foretold
merely the recovery of his vessels.

451. salutem: see 568. i.

452. afflictis: ist„ hitherto. rebus: may be either dat. or abl.
(553; 600. α).

454. quae . . . urbi, miratur: ‘ marvels at the city's prosperitys
As Sidgwick puts it, it is· ‘rather indirect exclamation than
indirecta question.'

455. inter se: a. vague phrase, seemingly expressive of the
emulation of the artists3 freely, ‘the handiwork of rival crafts-
men.’ [Others trans. ‘ as he compares the1n.⁷ Some editions read
intra se, ‘within himself,' to be taken with miratur] operum

laborem: lit. ‘the toil of their efforts'3 freely, ‘ their toilsome “

labor.’

458. saevum ambobus : idn, to the Atridae 011 the one hand, to
Priam 011 the other, ambobzm thus being not incorrectly used of
three persons. In the former case the reference is to the quarrel
that arose from Agamemnon's seizure of Achilles’ captive Briseis
(a quari-el which, with its consequent-es, is the theme of Homer's
Iliad). If there isnny occasion specially referred to in the case of
Priam, it is doubtless the incidents of ll. 483, 484.

461. sunt hic, etc.: ‘here too has worth (or- merit) its due
reward.’ Notioe sna referring to the dat. (the logical subject).
laudi: for dat. see 582.

